Welcome back to our study of Proverbs, and we're going to end chapter 7 in this lesson.
A little bit tired.
Someone might say, Brother Paul, the last seven teachings you've had the same shirt on.
That's because I've done all seven today.
I love doing Proverbs, but with my work at HeartCry and the 400 missionaries we have around the world, I stay pretty busy.
I can't escape and come down here as frequently as I would like to.
But when I do have an opportunity, I like to teach several lessons.
And so this will be the last lesson of the day.
And we will finish up Proverbs 7.
I want you to know this is a joy for me.
And even though it's not that formal, I'm kind of
teaching it in the same way that I taught Proverbs to my children over and over, over a period of many, many years.
And I do believe young people that if you will, if you'll study the book of Proverbs as well as the rest of Scripture, God will, well, he'll use it to transform your life.
He'll use it to transform your life.
Now, let's read Proverbs 7, verse 24,
through the end of the chapter.
Now therefore my sons, listen to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth.
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Do not stray into her paths.
For many are the victims she has cast down and numerous are all her slain.
Her house is in the way of shield descending to the chambers of death.
All right.
So
Let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, I pray that you would give ears to hear and that Lord there, there would be great fear of sin and great reverence for you.
Father, communicate through your spirit what no man can communicate to another.
illumine the mind, renew the mind.
And Lord, if there's someone in this that is listening to this that does not know your son, I pray that they would realize that he is the only answer.
And in him alone is found salvation.
In Jesus name.
Amen.
So
Of course, verse 24, now therefore my sons listen to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth.
Now therefore means that he's linking this to what preceded it and what preceded a description of how horrific our lives can be if we give ourselves to sin, that it is a very, very serious thing here.
that we have before us.
We see a young man who fell into temptation and literally destroyed himself.
Now don't think this is unique because many throughout history and many today are doing the same.
Notice that he says, listen to me, pay attention to me.
It's double speech.
It's just he's
emphasizing, piling one phrase upon another to say, I plead with you, listen to me.
It's like a father grabbing his son by the collar or putting his daughter's face in his hands and saying, please, please, I beg you, listen to me.
This is a matter of life and death of heaven and hell.
All right.
Now it says, do not turn
aside to her ways.
See, what we're assuming here is that, first of all, this person was walking in the path of righteousness, but turned aside and joined her in her ways.
And so the world is constantly standing outside the path of righteousness.
that the scripture marks out for us.
The world is constantly standing to one side, just like in Bunyan's Pilgrim Progress, calling and calling.
Step aside, step aside, turn to me, turn to me.
Don't keep your eyes focused on eternity.
Keep your feet in the paths of righteousness.
And you do that through the Word of God and prayer.
Do not
turn your heart aside to her ways because the moment you do, your feet are going to turn aside to her ways.
Do not stray into her path.
Don't try to live in some sort of broad way moving back and forth.
Jesus was very clear that the way to eternal life is narrow and it is marked out by the Word of God.
It is not marked out
by the opinions of man and most certainly the opinions of culture.
Focus on the word.
Know the word.
Mark each step of your life by what you know from scripture.
Then he says, now here's the big warning and you need to listen to it.
Let me just summarize it.
Her house is a tomb and it's filled full.
sends houses a tomb and it is filled full of billions and billions and billions of corpses of men who did not listen to counsel of women and youth who did not listen to God's counsel and end up in a house of death.
So he says, for many are the victims she has cast down.
The word here literally
is many are the pierced ones.
They've been pierced through like an arrow through a liver, dying in agony.
It refers to somewhat, to some, to being fatally wounded, pierced, pierced through.
In 1 Timothy 6, 10, Paul writes, for the love of money is a root of all sorts of evil and somebody longing for it.
have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs."
Now, here he's talking about wealth, but we could substitute any manner of temptation here.
Not just the temptation for money or the love of money, but the temptation of the lusts of the flesh, the temptations of fame, the temptations of this world, the temptations of the devil,
and some by longing for it have wandered away.
The moment, the moment you begin to notice in you a desire for the things of the world, crucify it, hate it, count it dead.
If necessary, go to your parents, go to the pastor and say, this is starting to take root in me, help me, deal with it quickly.
If you drink poison,
You would not say, okay, maybe in a month, I'll go to the doctor or go to the emergency.
No, if you were shot, if you ran yourself through with a spike, you'd say, take me immediately to deal with this problem.
When you see sin, deal with it immediately or it will grab you.
When you start seeing the desire grow in you,
The moment you see that, you know, I don't know what you'd want to call it, a seed or an acorn, start taking root, get it out of there.
Get it out of there at all costs because longing will eventually turn into walking and wandering into a path of death which leads to piercing, which leads to, well, eternal ruin.
Now, so he says, many are the victims she has cast down.
It can also be interpreted that she has caused to fall.
The world and the devil.
Now listen to me very carefully.
The world and the devil have a trophy room.
When we kill a deer sometimes, if it's big enough, we hang it on the wall or a turkey tail and a turkey beard, we hang it on the wall, a trophy room.
I killed this one when I was 12.
I killed this one when I was 20.
I killed this one with a long bow.
These are my trophies.
Well, you need to know the world and the devil have a trophy room as big as the world.
and many are there and they will never leave.
And so it says here, many are the victims.
She has cast down and numerous are all her slain.
Now see, it's just saying the same thing, isn't it?
For many are the victims that she's cast down.
That's one statement.
Now he's going to repeat it and say it again, just a different way for added emphasis and numerous are all her
slain.
This word for slain oftentimes implies a ruthless violence.
There is a violence in this world, two boxers fighting.
There's a degree of violence.
But I've seen men around the world whose violence, there was no mercy.
It was vile.
It was disgusting.
It was terrifying.
You look them in the eye and there's nothing there, but just evil.
That's the idea here.
That's the idea.
Not just slain, they didn't die in their sleep.
No, they were violently slain by sin, violently slain by the devil, violently slain by
the world.
Literally, this text, verse 26, we could do it this way.
Many are the pierced or mortally wounded that she has caused to fall and numerous are those whom she has violently slain.
Okay?
That's what we're dealing with here.
That's what we're dealing with.
And you may sit there right now and laugh.
You may think, Oh, yeah, I know.
But you won't be laughing in the end.
You'll be saying, why did I not listen to counsel?
Why did I not turn before it was too late?
And now it is too late.
Now, verse 27, her house is the way to shield, descending to the chambers of death.
Look how she describes her house in verses 16 and 17.
Look how she, look how sin describes its house.
Look how the devil describes his house.
Look at how the world describes the house.
Verse 16, I have spread my couch with coverings with colored linens of Egypt.
I have sprinkled my bed with mirth, alloys, alloys and cinnamon.
It looks beautiful and it smells beautiful.
But the coverings are covering up corpses.
And the perfume is just masking the scent of rotten flesh.
Because when you get over to verse 27, her house is the way to shield descending to the chambers of death.
When I was a boy, you know,
I can remember one time where my dad told me he said, he said, boy, get up, get the tractor.
We have a cow out in a certain field.
And it was standing too close to a tree during a thunderstorm.
And it was struck by lightning.
And he didn't find it until like three or four days after it happened.
He said, go out there, chain them, drag them with the tractor to the dump.
I can still, I remember the things that happened, what it took for me to drag that animal to wear this dump where it was for dead bodies of animals, of cattle that had died.
And it was just hellish.
It was, you know, you'd wear a bandana around your face, hoping that it would kind of, you know, it would cut the scent
And that's what we're talking about.
Many of you, you know, your, your lives, your lives have been so isolated.
You can't understand what I'm talking about, but it's a rot and a stink unlike anything you could ever imagine.
And that's what he's talking about.
She describes her house as beautiful, as fragrant.
It's nothing but rotting corpses.
In verse 27, we see, I've written here, it's not a house of pleasure or even a house of entertainment or like Bunyan's vanity fair.
It's not that.
It's a mausoleum.
It's a vault.
It's a crypt filled with rotting corpses.
Again, remember what I said, the propaganda looks great.
But when you pass through the door, it may still look great until that door slams behind you and then they turn the lights on.
and you see that you're among corpses and you have become one.
Her house I wrote here is like a spider's lair.
I don't know if you've ever read the Lord of the Rings and those works, Fellowship of the Rings, Return of the King, Shilob.
When you read about, you know, Frodo going in there,
going into those tunnels.
It's terrifying trying to escape the rot of all the corpses that had been struck by that spider.
That's the idea filled with the rotting corpses of all who have given in to temptation.
Now, we're ending this chapter.
It's kind of dark.
Well, should I hide that from you?
Should I let you find that out yourself?
I don't think so.
If I truly care, if your parents truly care, if your preacher truly cares and is not a coward, they're all going to warn you.
There are so many beautiful things about life and relationships.
God has given so much grace
that we even live in a world that still has beauty is a demonstration of God's kindness.
It truly is.
But no, there is a dark side and it is terrible.
Let me give you up.
There's a good illustration.
It doesn't fit perfectly.
It's in Isaiah 14, 9 through 11.
It's sometimes applied to the king of Babylon, sometimes to the devil.
But it's this person who has fallen
and is now being received in shield or in the grave or in death.
And it says, shield from beneath is excited over you to meet you when you come, the grave.
Like almost like portrayed here is some sort of animal devouring, excited about a prey.
It arouses for you the spirits of the dead.
So there's just countless other
ruined lives there.
And you're going to join them.
All the leaders of the earth.
It doesn't matter how powerful you are.
There is a payday someday.
If you neglect the Lord, you neglect the Word.
You reject Christ.
You're going to join a countless multitude of individuals, great and small, that will live
eternally in death, maybe exist would be a better term in death.
It raises all the kings of the nations from their thrones.
They will all respond and say to you, even you have been made weak as we, you have become like us.
Can you imagine being met in the gates of hell by a multitude
of its inhabitants saying to you, Welcome.
You are now like us.
There is no life here.
There is no escape.
In verse 11, your pompt and the music of your harps have been brought down to shield.
Listen, I love laughter and I love
joy and I love my friendships and I love when we get together here in the office and in church and I love all kinds of things, hunting camps and running around with my buddies.
But one day all the pomp and all the music and all the laughter is going to die.
I'm going to die.
You're going to die.
And the question comes, when we die, everything here is gone.
We'll either enter into a glory that we can't even begin to comprehend, or we'll enter into a darkness and a death that no man can understand.
But one day all the harps will stop.
All the dancing will stop.
All the laughter will stop.
All the beauty and all the riches will be gone.
And then it said, maggots are spread out as your bed beneath you and worms are your covering.
Jesus talked about a place where the worm does not die.
Some people say, well, that's metaphor.
Well, let's say for a moment it is.
I think it's far more realistic than what people believe, but let's just say for a moment,
that that's metaphor.
What you need to understand is that metaphor is weak.
Whatever's waiting, you in hell is far worse than what that metaphor is communicating.
There is no language or word or metaphor to describe heaven.
There is no word or metaphor language to describe hell.
You say, Brother Paul, I'm trying to scare us.
No, I'm trying to put fear in you.
There's a difference.
It's much more.
profound.
When I used to take new guys into the jungle, I would say, now listen to me.
There are some things you should not do.
You must not do.
And there are certain things that you must do.
And this is not a game.
It's not a movie.
All right, it's the same way.
We've gone through chapter seven.
And in many ways, it's been a very dark and solemn journey.
We come out on the other side with this, fear sin, reverence God and run to Jesus Christ and stay there and make His Word the lamp because it is the only lamp.
Make His Word the lamp to your feet and you'll do well.
You'll do well.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you.
Oh, dear God, please work through these messages.
I have no desire for eloquence or to talk for the sake of talking.
Use this, Lord.
for the benefit of many in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Well, God bless you and hopefully next time we will be in chapter eight.
And there's a lot of good there.
So God bless.